Winston Smith is a low-rankingmember of the ruling Party in London, in the nationof Oceania. Everywhere Winston goes, even his own home, the Partywatches him through telescreens; everywhere he looks he sees theface of the Partys seemingly omniscient leader, a figure knownonly as Big Brother. The Party controls everything in Oceania, eventhe peoples history and language. Currently, the Party is forcingthe implementation of an invented language called Newspeak, whichattempts to prevent political rebellion by eliminating all wordsrelated to it. Even thinking rebellious thoughts is illegal. Suchthoughtcrime is, in fact, the worst of all crimes./nAs the novel opens, Winston feels frustrated by the oppression andrigid control of the Party, which prohibits free thought, sex, and anyexpression of individuality. Winston dislikes the party and has illegallypurchased a diary in which to write his criminal thoughts. He hasalso become fixated on a powerful Party member named OBrien, whomWinston believes is a secret member of the Brotherhoodthe mysterious,legendary group that works to overthrow the Party./nWinston works in the Ministry of Truth, where he altershistorical records to fit the needs of the Party. He notices a coworker,a beautiful dark-haired girl, staring at him, and worries that sheis an informant who will turn him in for his thoughtcrime. He istroubled by the Partys control of history: the Party claims thatOceania has always been allied with Eastasia in a war against Eurasia,but Winston seems to recall a time when this was not true. The Partyalso claims that Emmanuel Goldstein, the alleged leader of the Brotherhood,is the most dangerous man alive, but this does not seem plausibleto Winston. Winston spends his evenings wandering through the poorestneighborhoods in London, where the proletarians, or proles, livesqualid lives, relatively free of Party monitoring./nOne day, Winston receives a note from the dark-hairedgirl that reads I love you. She tells him her name, Julia, andthey begin a covert affair, always on the lookout for signs of Partymonitoring. Eventually they rent a room above the secondhand storein the prole district where Winston bought the diary. This relationshiplasts for some time. Winston is sure that they will be caught andpunished sooner or later (the fatalistic Winston knows that he hasbeen doomed since he wrote his first diary entry), while Julia ismore pragmatic and optimistic. As Winstons affair with Julia progresses, hishatred for the Party grows more and more intense. At last, he receivesthe message that he has been waiting for: OBrien wants to see him./nWinston and Julia travel to OBriens luxurious apartment.As a member of the powerful Inner Party (Winston belongs to theOuter Party), OBrien leads a life of luxury that Winston can onlyimagine. OBrien confirms to Winston and Julia that, like them,he hates the Party, and says that he works against it as a memberof the Brotherhood. He indoctrinates Winston and Julia into theBrotherhood, and gives Winston a copy of Emmanuel Goldsteins book,the manifesto of the Brotherhood. Winston reads the bookan amalgamof several forms of class-based twentieth-century social theoryto Juliain the room above the store. Suddenly, soldiers barge in and seizethem. Mr. Charrington, the proprietor of the store, is revealed ashaving been a member of the Thought Police all along./nTorn away from Julia and taken to a place called the Ministryof Love, Winston finds that OBrien, too, is a Party spy who simply pretendedto be a member of the Brotherhood in order to trap Winston intocommitting an open act of rebellion against the Party. OBrien spendsmonths torturing and brainwashing Winston, who struggles to resist.At last, OBrien sends him to the dreaded Room 101,the final destination for anyone who opposes the Party. Here, OBrientells Winston that he will be forced to confront his worst fear.Throughout the novel, Winston has had recurring nightmares aboutrats; OBrien now straps a cage full of rats onto Winstons headand prepares to allow the rats to eat his face. Winston snaps, pleadingwith OBrien to do it to Julia, not to him./nGiving up Julia is what OBrien wanted from Winston allalong. His spirit broken, Winston is released to the outside world.He meets Julia but no longer feels anything for her. He has acceptedthe Party entirely and has learned to love Big Brother.